Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm Kolie Moore. I'm not your host again. Kyle Helson is going to be hosting today for 10-Minute Tips as he continues his series on squatting and lifting.
So I want to thank everybody for listening as always and remember to please subscribe to the podcast and especially recommend it to people if you're liking what we're doing here. We're going to get back into the Wattstock stuff coming up very, very soon. And if you are looking forward to that, please let us know and let a friend know about what we're doing here on the podcast. So give us an iTunes rating if you would be so kind. And also remember that we are ad-free. So in exchange for that, we just ask that you donate if you can. And I want to thank everybody who's donated in the last couple months, especially those with the regular...
We have the show notes up on the website. I don't know if we're going to have show notes today. Probably not. We also have merch at empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com. And if you have any coaching and consultation inquiries or questions or comments, you can email empiricalcycling at gmail.com. We're also having...
Instagram AMAs, so at Empirical Cycling on Instagram, and every Saturday I'll post up something you can ask questions and I will answer them in the stories. And with that, I'm going to turn it right over to Kyle. Thank you, everybody. Hey, everyone. It's Kyle again this week. This is another in a series of episodes focusing on strength training, since for a lot of listeners, and especially if you live in the Northern Hemisphere, it's getting to be the off season for most people. This week, I want to follow up last week's episode.
that was about breathing and bracing for lifting and strength training and talk about the squat more specifically I mean the barbell back squat so this episode is going to cover two things one bar position and two stance or foot placement so right away when we talk about bar position I want to get something out of the way and that is
Please, if you can, do not use that little barbell pad thing. So the barbell pad that you'll see people wrap around the bar so it's more comfortable when they squat actually makes it harder when you get to heavier weights. And that's because it is usually covering up knurling that's on the bar. And that knurling in the center of the bar is actually designed to increase the friction between your shirt or your skin.
Squatting without a shirt on and the bar itself and actually prevent the bar from slipping down your back. And if you put that little pad thing on there, you're actually going to cover the knurling with a slippery piece of synthetic fabric that is more likely to slip against your shirt. So maybe painful, but just to get that out of the way, it's less painful.
When you place the bar on your back, regardless of where it is, then if you think about squeezing and contracting your upper back, so your traps, those big muscles, kind of meaty muscles behind your neck, if you squeeze those together and pull your shoulder blades back, you make a little shelf or some muscle on the top of your back for the bar to sit on. So then once you're going to put that bar on the top of your back with that good shelf that you're making by squeezing your...
your traps and squeezing your shoulder blades together you'll often see the squat divided as either a high bar or a low bar squat position so that's either putting the the high bar position where the bar rests higher up on your traps kind of on top of the traps but not so high that it's sitting on your vertebra because ow that would really hurt you know that little bony thing that sticks out of the base of your neck and the classic low bar squat is that of a more like a
Competitive Powerlifter, where you see a bar that is resting kind of almost at the bottom of the traps or maybe even a little bit below the traps and more on the rear delts, the backs of the shoulders. And where I think this gets confusing is that people think either I have to squat with a high bar position or I have to squat with a low bar position. But in fact...
the most extremes like the super upright very high bar Olympic weightlifters and the very leaned over very low bar competitive powerlifters are the extremes and your bar position can be in almost any position between those two locations as long as it is comfortable for you so bar placement in the squat like pretty much everything else is really more of a spectrum and not just a binary if you've never squatted or haven't squatted in a while it's worth experimenting with this bar placement
and see if one position is definitely more comfortable for you. Right out of the gate, I want to say if you know that you have limited or poor ankle and knee mobility, then low bar is probably going to be easier for you. And that's because with a high bar squat, you have to leave your torso much more upright, much more vertical as you travel up and down. So this is going to force your
and to flex more so that your knees can travel farther over your toes, farther forward over your toes than if you have a low bar squat position. Low bar squats, because of their more angled torso position, it looks much more leaned over. It means that when you squat, you actually squat down and back a little bit and your butt kind of goes back more. So that means your knees don't have to go as far forward.
Some claim, because of this low bar position that I just described where your butt is going back and your knees aren't going as far forward, means that a low bar squat is going to be better for the posterior chain, quote unquote. That's like your glutes and your hamstrings and your low back. But unfortunately, for those people, the science says this generally isn't true. Squats are a great glute exercise and a great quad exercise.
But they're not really a good hamstring exercise regardless of where you put the bar. Many studies with EMG's measurement show that glute and quad activation to be the same for barbell squats for a variety of positions. That's high bar, low bar, and actually for some front squat positions as well.
If you're worried about one of them being better or worse than the other, if you compete in a sport that is not named Olympic weightlifting or competitive powerlifting, it probably doesn't matter. The point is going to be developing strength in your quads and glutes.
The exact manner in which you are developing the strength for your quads and glutes doesn't matter because this is a very non-sport specific exercise. Squatting is not like riding a bike really at all except that you also use your legs and maybe your leg flexes over a similar range of motion but a lot of the other details are completely different. As an example for some athletes they may find that
Back squats don't really work for them for one reason or another and they have to do split squats or front squats or even leg press. So really you're using this exercise as a way to drive that glute and quad development. So secondly, foot placement. Generally speaking, if you are going to be a high bar squatter, you will find that you have a narrower foot placement, which means more like shoulder width.
While if you have a low bar position, you will find that your stance is a little bit wider. These are generalities, so this may not apply to you. There are high bar Olympic weightlifting athletes out there who have wider squat positions and there are very narrow stance low bar squatters out there in powerlifting as well. So like I said, these are just generally guidelines. This is something you can play with.
To determine whether a kind of wider stance or a kind of narrower stance works for you is if you're on a wooden floor or like a slip, a floor with a little bit of slip, put socks on so that your feet can slide and put your, leave your feet in like a shoulder width position, feet pointed a little bit out, not necessarily, not like totally duck footed and not like totally pigeon toed.
the range of motion that you can attain with leaving your full foot on the ground and not allowing your heels to come up. And then what you can do is from that position, because you're wearing socks on this wooden floor, you can wiggle your feet a little bit and see if playing with your stance width gets you a little bit more range of motion or a little bit less range of motion. If widening your feet, say, lets you get down a little bit lower, a little bit easier and not feel like you're...
Feeling something pinching in your hips or your knees or something like that, then maybe a little bit wider of a stance is good for you. If a little bit narrower of a stance means that you feel more comfortable kind of being in that little bit lower position, then that's great. Maybe that's what you should try with a loaded barbell. So again, you'll hear people talk about whether your feet should be straightforward or turned out a little bit or whatever. Generally, whatever is comfortable for you, whatever lets you complete the lift with...
The most stability and the most comfort is best. So for a lot of people, that's going to be turning your toes a little bit out. For some people, that may be in a much more extreme toes where their toes point out very, very wide. And for some people, that may mean leaving your toes pointed straight forward, sort of exactly having your feet parallel. Ultimately, your hip socket and your femur morphology will set the ultimate limit as to
What squat stance like foot position and width are going to be the most comfortable for you. So this means that while working on mobility is good and working on flexibility is good, there is going to be some limit in there due to your anatomy. So if your position doesn't feel great and you know you have to work on your mobility, great, keep doing it. But ultimately...
because lifting and squatting and putting up big numbers is not your primary sport. You shouldn't spend oodles and oodles and oodles amount of time searching for that way to add just five more pounds to your squat because honestly, just five more pounds to your squat is not really going to help your cycling all that much. All right. I hope that was a good episode. I hope you all got something out of it.
I'll see you next time, thanks for listening, bye